<pre>
  BIP: ?
  Layer: Applications
  Title: Bitcoin Encrypted Backup
  Author: // TBD
  Comments-Summary: No comments yet.
  Comments-URI: https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/wiki/Comments:BIP-????
  Status: Draft
  Type: Standards Track
  Created: 2025-08-22
  License: BSD-2-Clause
</pre>

==Introduction==

===Abstract===

This BIP specifies a compact, deterministic encryption scheme for wallet descriptors (BIP-380) and wallet policies (BIP-388) that contain **only public keys**.  The encrypted output—called a *Bitcoin Encrypted Backup* (BEB)—lets users outsource long-term storage to untrusted media or cloud services without revealing which addresses, scripts, or cosigners are involved.  Encryption keys are derived from the lexicographically-sorted public keys inside the descriptor itself, so any party who already holds one of those keys can later decrypt the backup without extra secrets or round-trips.  The format uses AES-GCM-256 with a 96-bit random nonce and a 128-bit authentication tag to provide confidentiality and integrity.  A single binary blob contains a magic header, version byte, optional derivation-path hints, per-key individual secrets, and the authenticated ciphertext.  While designed for descriptors, the same scheme can encrypt any arbitrary data that must remain private yet deterministically reconstructible by key holders.  The goal is to eliminate the single-point-of-failure that arises when the descriptor, not the seed, is lost.  Backups created with this specification are vendor-neutral, human-verifiable, and future-extensible through a one-byte version field.

===Copyright===

This BIP is licensed under the BSD 2-Clause License.  
Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted provided that the above copyright notice and this permission notice appear in all copies.

===Motivation===

In practice, losing the '''wallet descriptor''' (or '''wallet policy''') is often '''as catastrophic as losing the wallet’s seed''' itself.  While the seed grants the ability to sign, the descriptor grants a map to the coins.  In multisig or miniscript contexts, keys alone are '''not sufficient''' for recovery: without the original descriptor the wallet cannot reconstruct the script.

Offline storage of descriptors has two practical obstacles:

1. '''Descriptors are hard to store offline.'''

The JSON-serialized text can be far longer than a 12/24-word seed phrase.  Paper, steel, and other long-term analog media quickly become impractical for such lengths or error-prone to transcribe.

2. '''Online redundancy carries risk.'''

Keeping backups on USB thumb-drives, computers, phones, or (worst) cloud drives avoids the first problem but amplifies surveillance risk: anyone who gains these '''plaintext descriptors''' learns the wallet’s public keys, script structure, etc...  Even with encryption at the cloud provider, an attacker or a subpoena can compel access, and each extra copy multiplies the attack surface.

These constraints lead to an acute need for an '''encrypted, deterministic''', and ideally compact backup format that:

* can be '''safely stored in multiple places''', including untrusted on-line services,  
* can be '''decrypt only by intended holders''' of specified public keys,  
* and keeps both '''keys and plaintext''' hidden from any party who lacks the necessary key(s).

In bitcoin signing, the '''seed''' as it is what protects the key material that allows spending funds. 
Unauthorized access to the seed implies that attackers gain ownership of the funds (or at least the specific access controls that the keys are protecting).
Hence, it is very valuable for an attacker to gain access to seed, and they will be willing to increase the cost and the sophistication of the attacks, because of the potential of high returns.

Therefore, for seeds:

* '''digital copies are a high risk''': hardware signing devices have been built to keep the seeds in a secure enclave, separate from the machine the software wallet is running on.
*'''redundant copies of the seed are a high risk''': the seed has to be physically protected, and multiple copies in multiple places inherently make protection harder.

'''Descriptors''' and  ''xpubs''' are only private: unauthorized access allows an attacker, to spy on your funds. 
That is bad, but not nearly as valuable as taking your funds. 
Attackers might use this to get information about you, and to inform further attacks, but will lose interest once attempting an attack becomes too costly or sophisticated.

For '''descriptors''':

* '''digital copies are unavoidable''': each parties using the account will necessarily have a digital copy in their software wallet.
* additional '''redundant copies pose only a moderate risk'''.

Therefore, having multiple copies of the descriptor, whether physical, digital, on your disk or on the cloud, is a valid mean to reduce the risk of loss of funds, unlike replicating the seed, which would incur a much higher risk.

===Expected properties===

* '''Encrypted''': this allows users to outsource its storage to untrusted parties, for example, cloud providers, specialized services, etc..
* '''Has access control''': decrypting it should only be available to the desired parties (typically, a subset of the cosigners).
* '''Easy to implement''': it should not require any sophisticated tools.
* '''Vendor-independent''': it should be easy to implement using any hardware signing device.
* '''Deterministic''': the result of the backup is the same for the same payload. Not crucial, but a nice-to-have.

===Scope===

This specification applies to encrypting '''wallet descriptors''' (BIP-0380) or '''wallet policies''' (BIP-0388) that contain only '''public keys''' and any other relevant bitcoin "wallet" metadata. 
It is NOT intended for descriptors containing private keys, or private keys. 
The encrypted format is intended for long-term backup storage, not for interactive processes.

==Specification==

===Security considerations===

Deterministic encryption, by definition, cannot satisfy the standard [//https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Semantic_security semantic security] property commonly used in cryptography; however, in our context, it is safe to assume that the adversary does not have access to plaintexts, and no other plaintext will be encrypted with the same secrets.

===Secret generation===

The payload data is left unspecified here, the byte <tt>CONTENT</tt> can refer to some external specification. 
The operator ⊕  refers to the bitwise XOR operation.

* Let <tt>p1</tt>, <tt>p2</tt>, .., <tt>pn</tt> be the public keys in the descriptor/wallet policy, in increasing lexicographical order.
* let <tt>secret</tt> = sha256("BEB_DECRYPTION_SECRET" || <tt>p1</tt> || <tt>p2</tt> || ... || <tt>pn</tt> )
* let <tt>si</tt> = sha256("BEB_INDIVIDUAL_SECRET" || <tt>pi</tt>)
* let <tt>individual_secret_i</tt> = <tt>secret</tt> ⊕  <tt>si</tt>

===AES-GCM Encryption===

* let <tt>nonce</tt> = random()
* let <tt>cyphertext</tt> = aes_gcm_256_encrypt(<tt>payload</tt>, <tt>secret</tt>, <tt>nonce</tt>)

===AES-GCM Decryption===
In order to decrypt the payload of a backup, the owner of a certain public key <tt>p</tt> computes:

* let <tt>si</tt> = sha256("BEB_INDIVIDUAL_SECRET" || <tt>p</tt>)
* for each <tt>individual_secret_i</tt> generate <tt>reconstructed_secret_i</tt> = <tt>individual_secret_i</tt> ⊕ <tt>si</tt>
* for each <tt>reconstructed_secret_i</tt> process <tt>payload</tt> = aes_gcm_256_decrypt(<tt>cyphertext</tt>, <tt>secret</tt>, <tt>nonce</tt>)

Decryption will succeed if and only if p was one of the keys in the descriptor/wallet policy.


===Encoding===

The encrypted backup must be encoded as follow:

 <MAGIC><VERSION><DERIVATION_PATHS><INDIVIDUAL_SECRETS><CONTENT><ENCRYPTION><ENCRYPTED_PAYLOAD>

====Magic====

<tt>MAGIC</tt>: 7 bytes which are ASCII/UTF-8 representation of <tt>BEB</tt>: <tt><0x42, 0x45, 0x42, _, _, _, _></tt>

====Version====

<tt>VERSION</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer representing the format version. the current specification defines version <tt>0x01</tt>.

====Derivation Paths====

Note: the derication-path vector should not contains duplicates.

Derivation paths are optionals, they can be useful to simplify the recovery process if one have use a non-common derivation path to derive his key.

<tt>DERIVATION_PATH</tt> will follow this format:

 <COUNT>
 <CHILD_COUNT><CHILD><..><CHILD>
 <..>
 <CHILD_COUNT><CHILD><..><CHILD>

where:

<tt>COUNT</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer value representing how many derivations path are contained in this set.

Note: <tt>COUNT</tt> MUST be between 0 and 255, as empty vector is allowed.

<tt>CHILD_COUNT</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer value representing how many childs are contained in the current derivation path.

Note: <tt>CHILD_COUNT</tt> MUST be between 1 and 255, as empty vector is NOT allowed.

<tt>CHILD</tt>: 4 bytes unsigned integer, most significant bit first, representing a child number/index as defined in [https://github.com/bitcoin/bips/blob/master/bip-0032.mediawiki BIP-0032].

====Individual Secrets====

At least one individual secret must be supplied.

<tt>DERIVATION_SECRETS</tt> will follow this format:

 <COUNT>
 <INDIVIDUAL_SECRET>
 <..>
 <INDIVIDUAL_SECRET>

where:

<tt>COUNT</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer value representing how many secrets are contained in this set.

Note: <tt>COUNT</tt> MUST be between 1 and 255, as empty vector is NOT allowed.

<tt>INDIVIDUAL_SECRET</tt>: 32-byte serialisation of the individual secret as defined previously.

====Content====

<tt>CONTENT</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer to identify which values have been encrypted, current defined values are:

{|
| Value 
| Definition
|-
| 0x00 
| Undefined
|-
| 0x01 
| BIP-0380 Descriptor (as string)
|-
| 0x02 
| BIP-0388 Wallet policy (as string)
|-
| 0x03 
| BIP-0329 Labels (as JSONL)
|-
| 0x04 
| Wallet backup (as JSON)
|}

====Encrypted Payload====


<tt>ENCRYPTED_PAYLOAD</tt> will follow his format:

 <TYPE><NONCE><LENGTH><CYPHERTEXT>

where:

<tt>TYPE</tt>: 1 byte unsigned integer to identify which algorithm is used for encryption,
current defined values are:


{|
| Value 
| Definition
|-
| 0x00 
| Undefined
|-
| 0x01 
| AES-GCM256
|}


<tt>NONCE</tt>: 12 bytes nonce used in AES-GCM256 encryption protocol.

<tt>LENGTH</tt>: a [https://en.bitcoin.it/wiki/Protocol_documentation#Variable_length_integer compact size] integer representing the cypher text length.

<tt>CYPHERTEXT</tt>: the variable length cyphertext produced by the encryption algorythm defined in <tt>TYPE</tt>.

==Rationale==

The deterministic encryption approach is chosen so that every participant can re-derive the exact same encrypted blob from a given descriptor without extra round-trips or access to a signing device.  
AES-GCM-256 supplies authenticated encryption with 128-bit authentication tags, sufficient against offline ciphertext-only attackers.  
Public-key-derived secrets avoid an extra key-negotiation step while still binding decryption rights to the original wallet keys.

===Future Extensions===

Version field enables possible future enhancements:

- Additional encryption algorithms
- Support for threshold-based decryption

===Implementation===

// TBD url
See rust [http://<url>#implementation]

===Test Vectors===

// TBD url
See rust [http://<url>#implementation]

==Acknowledgements==

// TBD
